1. SCOPE AND SETUP
  - Section covers submitting SQL statements to four DBMS
    products: Microsoft Access 2019, Microsoft SQL Server 2019,
    Oracle Database, and Oracle MySQL 8.0.
  - SQL can be learned without running the queries, but it is
    easier to understand and remember when run while reading.
  - Free options named: SQL Server 2019 Developer and Express
    editions, Oracle Database XE, MySQL 8.0 Server Community
    Edition. Access 2019 is purchased as part of many Microsoft
    Office suites.
  - Install and database-creation instructions: Chapter 10A
    (SQL Server), 10B (Oracle), 10C (MySQL). Appendix A covers
    building the Access database by hand.
  - Sample database for the chapter: Cape Codd Outdoor Sports.
    Scripts for every product are at
    www.pearsonhighered.com/kroenke.
  - Tables and sample data come from Figures 2-4, 2-5, and 2-6.
    Chapter tables: RETAIL_ORDER, ORDER_ITEM, SKU_DATA, BUYER.
  - Three extra tables ship with the downloads and are used
    only for the end-of-chapter Review Questions: INVENTORY,
    WAREHOUSE, and CATALOG_SKU_2019.

2. MICROSOFT ACCESS AND THE ANSI-89 PROBLEM
  - The book's SQL is based on features present in the
    standards since ANSI SQL-92, which Microsoft calls ANSI-92
    SQL. Access 2019 still defaults to the earlier SQL-89
    version.
  - KEY TERM: Microsoft Jet SQL: Microsoft's other name for
    Access ANSI-89 SQL, after the Microsoft Jet DBMS engine,
    since replaced by the ACE DBMS engine.
  - ANSI-89 SQL differs significantly from SQL-92, so some
    SQL-92 features will not work in Access.
  - Access 2019, and the 2003, 2007, 2010, 2013, and 2016
    versions before it, contains a setting to use SQL-92
    instead. Microsoft added it so Access tools such as forms
    and reports could be used in application development for
    Microsoft SQL Server.
  - The chapter assumes default ANSI-89 mode, on the argument
    that this teaches the limitations and how to cope with
    them. Boxes titled "Does Not Work with Microsoft Access
    ANSI-89 SQL" flag the commands and clauses that fail there
    and give workarounds. The one permanent workaround is the
    SQL-92 syntax option.
  - Two Access files ship for the chapter: Cape-Codd.accdb (set
    to Access ANSI-89) and Cape-Codd-SQL-92.accdb (set to
    Access SQL-92).

3. TURNING ON SQL-92 SYNTAX IN ACCESS 2019
  - Path: File command tab, then the Options command to open
    the Access Options dialog box, then the Object Designers
    button. Figure 2-7, p. 61, shows the resulting Access
    Options Object Designers page.
  - The controlling group is SQL Server Compatible Syntax
    (ANSI 92), in the Query design area of that page. It
    controls SQL-89 versus SQL-92 syntax in Access queries.
      This database check box: SQL-92 syntax in the currently
        open database only.
      Default for new databases check box: SQL-92 syntax as the
        default for all new databases you create.
  - Click OK to save the option. The SQL syntax information
    dialog box then appears (Figure 2-8, p. 61). Read it, then
    click OK to close it.
  - Warnings that dialog states: existing queries may return
    different results or not run at all; the range of data
    types and reserved words will change; different wildcards
    will be used; make a backup copy first, because Access will
    close the database, compact it, and re-open it in the new
    mode.
  - Very few Access users or organizations set the SQL-92
    option, which is why the chapter stays on ANSI-89.

4. OPENING AN ACCESS QUERY WINDOW IN DESIGN VIEW
  - Open the database first, then create a new tabbed Query
    window.
  - Steps:
      1. Click the Create command tab (Figure 2-9, p. 62).
      2. Click the Query Design button.
      3. The Query1 tabbed document window opens in Design view
         along with the Show Table dialog box (Figure 2-10,
         p. 63).
      4. Click the Close button on the Show Table dialog box.
         Query1 now shows the Query Tools contextual command
         tab and the Design command tab (Figure 2-11, p. 63).
  - Design view is the window used for creating and editing
    Access queries, and is used with Access QBE.
  - KEY TERM: QBE: Query By Example, the Access graphical query
    builder.
  - In Figure 2-11 the Select button is selected in the Query
    Type group on the Design tab, meaning the query being built
    is the equivalent of an SQL SELECT statement. Active or
    selected buttons are always shown highlighted in gray on
    the Ribbon.
  - The View gallery sits in the Results group of the Design
    tab and switches between Design view and SQL view. A
    separate SQL View button is also displayed because Access
    always presents a "most likely needed" view choice as a
    button above the View gallery.

5. RUNNING AND SAVING AN SQL QUERY IN ACCESS
  - Steps to run:
      1. Click the SQL View button in the Results group on the
         Design tab. Query1 switches to SQL view (Figure 2-12,
         p. 64). It opens holding only SELECT; which is an
         incomplete command and produces no results if run. It
         is only the start of a query.
      2. Edit the statement, leaving out the SQL comment line
         (Figure 2-13, p. 64).
      3. Click the Run button on the Design tab. Results appear
         (Figure 2-14, p. 65).
  - The worked example is the chapter's first query, labeled
    SQL-Query-CH02-01: a four-column SELECT against SKU_DATA.
  - Generic form of the statement typed in every product:
      SELECT ProductID, ProductName, Category
      FROM   CATALOG_ITEM;
  - Access is a personal database and includes an application
    generator, so Access queries can be saved inside the
    database for future use. Enterprise-class products
    generally do not allow saved queries.
  - Steps to save:
      1. Click the Save button on the Quick Access Toolbar. The
         Save As dialog box appears (Figure 2-15, p. 65).
      2. Type the query name SQL-Query-CH02-01 and click OK.
         The document window is renamed and a query object of
         that name appears in the Queries section of the
         Navigation Pane (Figure 2-16, p. 66).
      3. Close the window with the document window's Close
         button.
      4. If Access asks whether to save changes to the design
         of the query, click Yes.
  - Assignment pattern, repeated for all four products: work
    through the other three queries from the SELECT/FROM/WHERE
    framework discussion and save each as SQL-Query-CH02-##,
    where ## is a sequential number from 02 to 04 matching the
    query label in that query's SQL comment line.

6. MICROSOFT SQL SERVER 2019
  - Needs SQL Server installed and a database holding the
    tables and data of Figures 2-4, 2-5, and 2-6. Chapter 10A
    covers obtaining and installing SQL Server 2019, creating
    the Cape_Codd database (note the underscore), and running
    the creation and population scripts.
  - GUI tool: Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio, shortened
    in the text to SQL Server Management Studio. It manages the
    DBMS and its databases, and installs as part of SQL Server
    2019 setup.
  - Steps to run a query (Figure 2-17, p. 67):
      1. Click the New Query button to display a new tabbed
         query window.
      2. If Cape_Codd is not shown in the Available Database
         box, select it in the Available Databases drop-down
         list.
      3. Click the IntelliSense Enabled button to disable
         IntelliSense.
      4. Type the SELECT command, without the SQL comment line.
      5. Optionally click the Parse button to check syntax
         before running. A Results window returns the message
         "Command(s) completed successfully" if the syntax is
         correct, or an error message if it is not.
      6. Click the Execute button to run the query. Results
         appear in a results window.
  - The Object Browser in the left-side window lists database
    objects; in Figure 2-17 Cape_Codd is expanded to show its
    tables. Many Management Studio functions attach to Object
    Browser objects and are reached by right-clicking for a
    shortcut menu.

7. SAVING QUERIES AS SCRIPTS IN SQL SERVER
  - SQL Server 2019 is an enterprise-class product and does not
    store queries within the DBMS. It does store SQL Views,
    which can be considered a type of query, covered in
    Chapter 7.
  - KEY TERM: SQL script file: a separately stored plain text
    file, usually with a .sql file name extension, that can be
    opened and run as an SQL command or set of commands. Often
    used to create and populate databases, and also used to
    store a query or set of queries.
  - Steps to save (Figure 2-18, p. 68):
      1. Click the Save button. The Save File As dialog box
         appears.
      2. Browse to \Documents\SQL Server Management Studio\
         Projects\DBP-e16-Cape-Codd-Database.
      3. Two SQL script names are already listed there: the
         scripts used to create and populate the Cape_Codd
         tables.
      4. In the File Name text box, type the script file name
         SQL-Query-CH02-01.
      5. Click the Save button.
  - Rerun a saved query by clicking the Open File button,
    opening the script that holds the query, then clicking
    Execute.
  - Recommended layout: a folder per database inside the
    Projects folder.

8. ORACLE DATABASE
  - Versions named: Oracle Database 18c, Oracle Database 19c,
    and Oracle Database XE. Chapter 10B covers obtaining and
    installing Oracle Database XE and creating the Cape Codd
    database. Oracle database naming is complex, so the text
    uses the generic name Cape Codd here and explains the
    naming in Chapter 10B.
  - Tooling: Oracle users have long been dedicated to the
    Oracle SQL*Plus command-line tool, but professionals are
    moving to the Oracle SQL Developer GUI tool, which the book
    adopts as its standard Oracle GUI. SQL Developer installs
    as part of Oracle Database 19c, but must be downloaded and
    installed separately for Oracle Database XE.
  - Steps to run a query (Figure 2-19, p. 69):
      1. Open the Cape-Codd-Database connection in SQL
         Developer. A tabbed SQL Worksheet is displayed.
      2. In the SQL Worksheet, type the SELECT command, without
         the SQL comment line.
      3. Click the Execute button. Results appear in the Query
         Result tabbed window.
  - The left-side pane is the Connections object browser, which
    shows connected databases and expands to show tables. Many
    SQL Developer functions attach to its objects and are
    reached by right-clicking for a shortcut menu.
  - Enterprise-class, so no queries stored in the DBMS. SQL
    Views are stored, discussed later in the chapter. Queries
    are saved as SQL script files.
  - Steps to save a script (Figure 2-20, p. 71):
      1. Click the Save button. The Save dialog box appears.
      2. Click the Documents button on the Save dialog box,
         then browse to the DBP-e16-Cape-Codd-Database folder.
      3. Two creation and population scripts are already listed
         there.
      4. In the File Name text box, type the script file name
         SQL-Query-CH02-01.sql.
      5. Click the Save button.
  - Path shown in Figure 2-20: Users\{UserName}\Documents\
    SQL Developer\DBP-e16-Cape-Codd-Database. Recommended
    layout: a SQL Developer folder inside Documents, then a
    subfolder per database.
  - Rerun a saved query with the SQL Developer Open File
    button, browse to and open the query file, then click
    Execute.

9. ORACLE MYSQL 8.0
  - Needs MySQL installed and a database holding the tables and
    data of Figures 2-4, 2-5, and 2-6. Chapter 10C covers
    obtaining and installing MySQL Community Server 8.0,
    creating the cape_codd database (all lowercase, with an
    underscore), and running the scripts.
  - GUI tool: MySQL Workbench, installable alongside the DBMS
    using the MySQL Installer. SQL statements are created and
    run in the Workbench, which calls a database a schema.
  - Steps to run a query (Figure 2-21, p. 72):
      1. Right-click the cape_codd schema object to display the
         shortcut menu, then click Set as Default Schema. This
         makes cape_codd the default schema, that is, the
         active database.
      2. In the Query 1 tabbed window inside the SQL Editor
         tabbed window, type the SELECT command, without the
         SQL comment line.
      3. Click the "Execute the statement under the keyboard
         cursor" button. Results appear in a tabbed Result Grid
         window.
  - The left-side pane is the Navigator; expanding cape_codd
    shows its tables. Many Workbench functions attach to
    Navigator objects and are reached by right-clicking for a
    shortcut menu.
  - Enterprise-class, so no queries stored in the DBMS. SQL
    Views are stored, discussed later in the chapter. Queries
    are saved as SQL script files.
  - Steps to save a script (Figure 2-22, p. 73):
      1. Click the "Save the script to a file" button. The Save
         SQL Script dialog appears.
      2. Browse to Documents\MySQL Workbench\Schemas\
         DBP-e16-Cape-Codd-Database.
      3. In the File name text box, type the query file name
         SQL-Query-CH02-01.
      4. Click the Save button.
  - MySQL Workbench stores files in the user's Documents folder
    by default. Recommended layout: a subfolder per MySQL
    database.
  - Rerun a saved query with the File | Open SQL Script menu
    command, select and open the .sql file, then click the
    "Execute the statement under the keyboard cursor" button.

10. CROSS-PRODUCT PATTERNS WORTH MEMORIZING
  - The same SELECT text runs unchanged in all four products.
    The SQL comment line is left out of the statement as run,
    though it could have been included in the SQL code.
  - Comment syntax the book uses to label queries:
      /* *** SQL-Query-CH02-01 *** */
  - Only Access stores queries inside the database, because it
    is a personal database with an application generator. The
    three enterprise-class products store SQL Views but not
    queries, so queries live in .sql script files instead.
  - Database naming by product: Cape-Codd.accdb (Access file
    name), Cape_Codd (SQL Server, underscore), Cape Codd
    (Oracle, the generic name used in the text; the SQL
    Developer connection is Cape-Codd-Database), cape_codd
    (MySQL, all lowercase with underscore).
  - Run button by product: Run (Access), Execute (SQL Server
    Management Studio and Oracle SQL Developer), Execute the
    statement under the keyboard cursor (MySQL Workbench).
  - Left-side object pane by product: Navigation Pane (Access),
    Object Browser (SQL Server), Connections object browser
    (Oracle), Navigator (MySQL).
  - Query entry surface by product: SQL view of the Query
    window (Access), tabbed query window (SQL Server), SQL
    Worksheet (Oracle), Query 1 tab inside the SQL Editor
    (MySQL).
  - Results surface by product: query results (Access), Results
    window (SQL Server), Query Result tabbed window (Oracle),
    Result Grid (MySQL).
  - Right-clicking an object in the left-side pane to get a
    shortcut menu is stated for SQL Server, Oracle, and MySQL.
  - Parse in SQL Server Management Studio is the only syntax
    check separate from running given anywhere in this section;
    the Access, Oracle, and MySQL walkthroughs go straight from
    typing to running. (added)
  - The three enterprise-class tools all use a folder named
    DBP-e16-Cape-Codd-Database for that database's scripts, but
    under different parent paths.
  - Book environment for all three enterprise walkthroughs:
    Windows 10. Command terminology may vary on Windows 7,
    Windows 8.1, Microsoft Server 2016 or 2019, or Linux.

11. FIGURE INDEX FOR THIS SECTION
  - Figure 2-7, p. 61: Access 2019 Options Object Designers
    page. Carries the Object Designers button and the SQL
    Server Compatible Syntax (ANSI 92) check boxes.
  - Figure 2-8, p. 61: Access 2019 SQL Syntax Information
    dialog box. Carries the mode-switch warnings.
  - Figure 2-9, p. 62: the Create command tab and the Query
    Design button.
  - Figure 2-10, p. 63: the Show Table dialog box and its Close
    button.
  - Figure 2-11, p. 63: the Query Tools contextual command tab,
    the Design tab, the Query Type group with Select selected,
    the SQL View button, and the View gallery drop-down arrow.
  - Figure 2-12, p. 64: the Query1 window in SQL view, showing
    the incomplete SELECT; statement.
  - Figure 2-13, p. 64: the complete SQL query statement in the
    window, plus the Run button.
  - Figure 2-14, p. 65: the query results.
  - Figure 2-15, p. 65: the Access Save As dialog box. Carries
    the Save button, the dialog box, the query name entry, and
    the OK button.
  - Figure 2-16, p. 66: the named and saved query: renamed
    window plus the query object in the Queries section of the
    Navigation Pane.
  - Figure 2-17, p. 67: running a query in SQL Server
    Management Studio. Carries the New Query, IntelliSense
    Enabled, Parse, and Execute buttons, the Available
    Databases drop-down, the expanded Cape_Codd database and
    tables, and the Results tabbed window.
  - Figure 2-18, p. 68: saving a query as an SQL script in SQL
    Server Management Studio. Save File As dialog box, the
    script folder, and the two existing scripts.
  - Figure 2-19, p. 69: running a query in Oracle SQL
    Developer. Connections object browser, SQL Worksheet,
    Execute button, Query Result tabbed window.
  - Figure 2-20, p. 71: saving an Oracle query as an SQL
    script. Save dialog box, Documents folder button, existing
    scripts.
  - Figure 2-21, p. 72: running a query in the MySQL Workbench.
    SQL Editor tabbed window and toolbar, the Query 1 tab, the
    execute button, the Navigator with cape_codd expanded, and
    the Result Grid window.
  - Figure 2-22, p. 73: saving a MySQL query as an SQL script.
    The Save the script to a file button and the Save SQL
    Script dialog box.

12. LIKELY QUIZ POINTS
  - Access 2019 defaults to ANSI-89 SQL, also called Microsoft
    Jet SQL. The book's SQL is SQL-92 and later.
  - The Jet engine was replaced by the ACE engine in Access.
  - The Access option that switches to SQL-92 is SQL Server
    Compatible Syntax (ANSI 92), on the Object Designers page
    of Access Options, with two check boxes: This database, and
    Default for new databases.
  - QBE stands for Query By Example.
  - SELECT; alone is incomplete and returns nothing.
  - SQL script file: plain text, separately stored, .sql
    extension, opened and run as SQL commands.
  - Access saves queries in the database; SQL Server, Oracle,
    and MySQL do not, but all three save SQL Views.
  - GUI tool per product: Access Query window, SQL Server
    Management Studio, Oracle SQL Developer (professionals
    moving to it from SQL*Plus), MySQL Workbench.
  - Parse checks SQL Server syntax and returns "Command(s)
    completed successfully" when valid.
  - IntelliSense is disabled before typing in the SQL Server
    example.
  - MySQL requires Set as Default Schema on cape_codd before
    running.
  - Oracle SQL Developer must be installed separately for
    Oracle Database XE, but ships with Oracle Database 19c.
  - Chapter 10A is SQL Server, 10B is Oracle, 10C is MySQL;
    Appendix A is building the Access database. SQL Views are
    Chapter 7.
  - Queries in this chapter are saved as SQL-Query-CH02-##, ##
    running 02 to 04 after the first one.
  - INVENTORY, WAREHOUSE, and CATALOG_SKU_2019 are for the
    Review Questions only, not the chapter discussion.
